#Case study: The city of Cuenca and Tomebamba River

[back](./README.md)

The research examines how the tactical urbanism addresses the improvement of the public space, particularly, the riverfronts. For that, the research gives a description of the study area and its conditions and characteristics; later, it asses specific zones along the Tomebamba river; and, it finishes reflecting the possibilities of improvement of Tomebamba riverfronts through tactical urbanism.

3.1	Case study: The city of Cuenca and Tomebamba River
The analysis is held in the city of Cuenca, characterized by an irregular topography and a rich hydrography network (133 Km), with four rivers: Tomebamba, Yanuncay, Tarqui and Machángara and a considerable network of streams. Currently, Cuenca is the third most populated city of Ecuador with 331.888 inhabitants and an extension of 7.300 ha (INEC, 2010, p. 7). It is located between 2.530 and 2.580 m above sea level, with an average temperature of 15 °C. It has the lowest poverty levels in the country and the highest levels of higher education and employment (INEC, 2018, p. 5).
With its full name, Santa Ana de los cuatro ríos de Cuenca, the city has always maintained a close relationship with water and has forged its image around the rivers, specially the Tomebamba river. All generations of cuencanos live daily the influence of the this river, hence the large amount of literature, poems, anecdotes, legends that have been created around it (Vega, 1997, p. 9). Tomebamba river represents an irreplaceable part of Cuenca’s tradition and acknowledging that the banks of rivers and streams constitute the backbone component of the green network and public space of cities (Al-Faisal et al., 2017), it is possible to say that Cuenca has a significant potential and can take advantage of these areas (Fig.  5). 
However, several problems associated with these spaces can be identified: lack of continuity related to the pedestrian network; deterioration of spatial and environmental quality; low biodiversity; lack of quality urban design; abandonment and insecurity, among others. All of them affecting the relationship between the river, the city and its citizens; triggering processes of abandonment, privatization, urban decay and segregation (Hermida et al., 2017). 
In this sense, the analysis does not focus on the river as a water resource but on the possibilities of their banks as public spaces and gives special attention on interventions that motivate inclusion and democratization of social life, seeks for participation and environmental responsibility, and improve co-presence, civilized and even egalitarian interaction between different social groups. 

#How to assess the riverfronts?

The research is based on the research project Urban River of the LlactaLAB Sustainable Cities group of the University of Cuenca. The mentioned project provided a toolbox that evaluates connectivity and comfort of urban riverbanks, so as to allow comparative visual and numeric analysis between different zones of the same river, distinct rivers in the same city and rivers in various cities (Hermida et al., 2019).  The toolbox was applied to five zones of the Tomebamba River of the city of Cuenca in Ecuador (Fig.  6). The selected zones respond to homogeneous population density, land use and percentage of vegetation considering primary data collection and official information from the municipality level and national level (Hermida et al., 2017)

The project developed 13 indicators (Table 1) based on the following criteria: a) gives data to provide accurate information; b) easy to quantify and replicate in a continuous manner; c) easy to monitor in the long term at a feasible and reasonable cost; d) adequately represent the system and its elements; e) effective in capturing system changes to evaluate causes, effects and trends; f) does not depend significantly on other indicators that are difficult to obtain; g) clear in its interpretation so that it can be understood by different actors and users; and, h) fulfil their role of supporting the process of policy analysis and decision making. Each indicator implied a geo process and delivered an Urban River Sustainability Index value in each analysis unit (Hermida et al., 2019)


