#Results
Using the LlactaLAB study and after the process of categorization, the research got a final value for each category by stating 2 conditions. First, all indicators have the same weight and secondly, the final value responds to an average value of all the involved indicators per category.
The results of each category allowed to present 2 main outcomes. First, overview of the river according to each category (UM, LD and EC). For instance, how is Urban mobility along the full extension of the river? Or is the environmental care identified along the river corridor? It permits to visualize the possible imbalances and strengths of the river as a single element that crosses the city. 
The Fig.  7 shows an overview of the results of the fronts of the Tomebamba river as a connected corridor. And this corridor is uneven. The corridor present weaknesses in specific points of the river. The riverfront's urban mobility is reduced as it moves away from the city centre; the environmental care, although it remains in the average value, it is not fully strengthened along the river zones; and, the low results in local development in the riverfronts concludes the need to improve the appropriation of the public space, its quality and attractiveness.

Picture

For the second outcome, the values obtained for all the categories are shown in each river zone (Fig.  8). What to reinforce or what to improve in zone 1 to have all the categories working at the same pace? It gives the possibility of prioritization or promotion of one tactical intervention over another according to the results. In this way, decision-making will be more effective, relevant, and strategic.

Picture

##Urban Mobility -UM-: a corridor along the river
If we talk about adequate urban mobility, it must be efficient and seek the use of non-motorized means of transport and public transport. That is the goal. And good mobility cannot be understood without characterizing it with good connectivity. In this sense, this category is more aligned to a well-balanced unique element approach. Conceiving the river as a corridor that must offer continuity and accessibility along its banks is fundamental. 
As exposed in Fig.  10, urban mobility is mostly compromised in the areas that are farther away from the urban centre. Zone 1 obtained a final value of -0.90, representing the most vulnerable of all. Consequently, this zone can be understood as the priority unit for intervention. Zone 5 is the second in line, which also presents difficulties mainly in pedestrian access. In this sense, the results showed a segmented and interrupted corridor. As it moves away from the city centre, the river's connectivity and balance in terms of road, public transportation and pedestrian access is reduced. 

##Local Development -LD -: social integration through the riverfronts
The Fig.  11 shows average and deficient results in the riverfronts. It is the category with the lowest results among the zones in comparison with urban mobility category and environmental care category. In general, although there is maintenance and management of public space, the riverfronts in each zone fail as a place to meet and interact, but also as a corridor that welcomes and promotes integration and ownership in the community, which is contradictory to the cultural heritage and history of the Tomebamba river and the city of Cuenca. 
A study developed in 2016 in the same study zones presented the users behaviour in the Tomebamba river (Fig.  9). It concluded that the zones closer to the city centre have a greater influx of users than the ones far away; also the majority of the observed population along the river were men (62%); and, as a general pattern, all zones presented fewer children and elderly. (Hermida et al., 2017). 
 
It is noteworthy that even in the most popular and central areas of the city: zone 2, zone 3 and zone 4, which have better result in urban mobility and accessibility and more presence of citizens, their results remain negative. Therefore, it is not surprising, considering the urban mobility results, that zones 1 and 5 are even more vulnerable.

Picture

##Environmental care -EC-: research, education and good practices

The Environmental care category reached an average value for all zones (Fig.  12). Obtaining similar values along the entire length of the river confirms that the river can be intervened as a single green corridor that crosses the city. 

However, if we look at the specific values of the indicators, it is possible to visualize the heterogeneity between zones. On the one hand, vegetation diversity reaches positive values only in zones 3 and 4, but if we review soil permeability, zones 1 and 5 are the most adequate to sustain the natural soil cycle and the development of ecosystems in the urban environment. 
One of the most striking indicators is the shaded area. All zones showed low or even null values, which indicates the lack of trees on the riverfronts. These elements are essential for temperature control in public spaces and living areas.

3 PICTURES

##Tactical Urbanism as a possibility in Tomebamba’s riverfronts

Now, what could be the contribution of tactical urbanism to improve the conditions of the Tomebamba riverfronts, its vulnerabilities and potentialities? As mentioned in previous chapters, the study is intended to bridge the gap where a river development project designed years ago is still waiting for funds before it can be revitalize; or where regulations are so strong that a major redesign could be difficult or impossible; and the land available is questioned between its potential to serve as a quality public space today and the distant future where the project finally meets all requirements and becomes a reality.
The three projects outlined in chapter 2.4 are just a small sample of the infinite solutions that tactical urbanism offers. All of them sharing the same characteristic: A short term, flexible, innovative intervention that generated a positive impact in the city. In other words, Tactical Urbanism as a high-impact tool for social transformation in urban mobility, local development and environmental care.
The results shown by category, as an element and as a study area enable decision-makers, planners and even the community and its organizations to select a tactical intervention with more resources before choosing from the infinite number of options. It enables us to be strategic in our use of tactics. Without detracting from the community value of what tactical urbanism means, its origin and without betraying its concepts.
Modest, inexpensive, community-led interventions can provide space and time for testing, innovation, creativity, flexibility and adjustments. Tomebamba’s riverfronts can benefit from tactical intervention as a resource for community engagement. Considering the low values that Tomebamba river presents in its local development, the experimentation is very likely to invite people's acceptance of the project before disbursing large amounts of resources. Tactical intervention can, to a greater or lesser extent, guarantee the success of a project in the long term. The project Yo vivo Map8 is an example of experimentation prior to a final proposal. 
The areas farthest from the city centre were the lowest rated in the evaluation of the categories. Therefore, tactical interventions can play a valuable role in temporarily activating a space, whether to reinforce traditions and culture, encourage the participation of vulnerable groups or promote outdoor activities that benefit from the context and weather conditions. The security and use of the most vulnerable areas of the Tomebamba’s riverfronts can be exponentially increased through seasonal interventions, during festive periods or as spaces for social expression. As the projects Yo vivo Map8 and West Palm beach teaches us, tactical urbanism can be, depending on the context, a powerful and successful tool that can be applied seasonally or constantly over time.
Finally, the fact that projects are small-scale and less expensive than the average of urban development projects (landscape or architectural design projects) does not mean that they cannot achieve high standards and quality. The innovation shown on the platform in Olfen confirms that attention to detail, expertise, and solidity of construction -not only on a physical matter- is a must. The riverfronts of the Tomebamba can be the subject of high-quality study and research. Cuenca is a university city that maintains a special connection with the river, therefore the innovation of combining the richness of the natural environment and tactical interventions suggests a level that transcends the urgent need for tactical urbanism but rather a space to gain valuable knowledge and exploit potentiality.

##Conclusions

A century ago one in ten people lived in cities (Habitat III, 2017). Today more than fifty percent of the world's population does, and the United Nations projects that seventy-five percent will be living in cities by 2050. The growing increase in urban population places us in front of the need to generate adaptable and scalable urban solutions. The challenges that cities will face in terms of urban mobility, environmental impact and social development are imminent. 
Given the magnitude of the challenges, the traditional way in which we have understood development will not be sufficient. To meet the challenges, we must combine citizen urbanism tools – like tactical urbanism– with long-term planning strategies. Short-term urban prototypes help us to glimpse the long-term effect that such transformations could have on our cities. We can intervene today. Tactical urbanism interventions enable us to test and fail quickly and cheaply, so that we can adjust the strategy and scale it up.
Some examples of tactical urbanism approaches carried out in Latin America, North America and Europe were presented. All of them have arisen to solve urban mobility problems, to promote environmental care and to encourage local development in public spaces. One of the most valuable ones: riverfronts. Of course, the document does not cover all existing tactical experiences, but in the ones presented confirmed an enhancement of the riverfronts.
The study used these positive results from the tactical examples (Yo vivo Map8, West Palmm Beach and Olfen Platform) to exemplify the contributions of tactical urbanism to the improvement of the public space; and through the assessment of the riverfronts of the Tomebamba, it was possible to show an overview that guides in which location (study zone) and field (urban mobility, environmental care and local development) those actions should be prepared and implemented. 
The study of zones and the results of the evaluation showed relevant conclusions: the western part of the city is the most vulnerable, the centre of the city does not necessarily take advantage of the full potential of the riverfronts, the space is not sufficiently attractive and accessible to generate a place of inclusion and integration. Thus, the study of zones already points out the characteristics that the interventions should respond to. In other words, tactical urbanism appears as the How are we getting things done, but though the evaluation of public space -riverfronts- and the prioritization of the field of tactical action we say How are we getting things done better.
Of course, this tool does not guarantee a full solution. Moreover, after this research, it is even clearer that it is a useful part-of-the-process tool. Tactical urbanism interventions ultimate value lies in its ability to spark action on the grassroots level. Thus, holding a seasonal event or temporarily installing furniture needs to be pushed further to implement true changes. Tactical urbanism can serve as a tool for the formal planning process.
Tactical actions should be seen as an ally for formal planning. It is the moment and context in which experimentation and trial and error will allow institutions to work side by side with community-based organizations and the citizens. Tactical urbanism has the potentiality to open the door for citizens acceptance and engagement to major projects.
Another conclusion to mention is that tactical urbanism interventions have a spill over effect in other categories. Urban mobility, local development and environmental care cannot and should not be understood only in isolation, they are also part of a system that boils down to overcoming citizen needs. Testing a new bike route in the city improves urban mobility, but it will definitely have an effect on the protection of the environment and at the same time will be an attractive space for people's active participation. Obviously not all interventions will have the same level of influence and perhaps not in all cases this will be essential, but it must be considered. 
Finally, more research on tactical urbanism in riverfronts is necessary to reveal the processes behind these initiatives and their spatial, cultural and environmental significance, but it is impossible to deny its potential to fill the gap between today’s passivity and the future’s uncertainty. 


